Hi, my name is Luis Lopez and I'm a software engineer at one of the NASA Earth Science Data
Centers. I hope that I don't mention a lot of acronyms because that's, you know, a disease
that NASA has and government agencies, but I'll try to explain all the acronyms and hopefully
this is not a boring talk for you. So I'm going to present a Python package that has improved
the experience of scientists trying to get data from NASA Earth Sciences.
This is basically the gist of it. If you want to take home the message is that a couple years ago
we started developing this package that facilitates how scientists access satellite data,
basically, and reduces the time to science. This is a must, I think, for the times that we're
living in and it became now kind of a small community-led project that has helped a lot of
different research groups to accelerate their science. And also the other message that you
have to take home is that we have the coolest logo. And I don't know if, well, you probably
are an R user and you notice something particular about our logo and that is that it fits with our
ecosystem. And the reason for that is that it was designed by Allison Hertz, the designer for a lot
of our shiny packages and different things in the art world. So we're really happy about that.
Now, I'm going to tell you the story of why, right? The main reason why is, as you all know
probably, how many of you have experienced what is happening in our planet lately. Like every day
you read in the news or you experience yourself that there is something off with the planet,
either in the way of a natural catastrophe or in the way of, you know, disruptions to what
used to be normal. And now we're living in a world that, you know, things like this happen more often.
And I'm not going to dive too deep into the science of why this is caused by humans because that's,
I mean, a given. But one important thing to take into account is that we're altering
the ecosystem and the natural systems of the planet.
So a way of looking at this for science, it's called the planetary boundaries. So the planet
has its own way of, you know, balancing different systems. Like this is a way of looking at the
whole thing, right? Like we have like ocean acidification. We have like pollution in the
atmosphere. We have things like, well, sea level rise. And all of those things have,
they belong to a system that interact with each other. So they're not isolated. And you
to study the whole thing, you need to basically pull information from different sources.
And if you're a research scientist, most likely you're going to deal with different
data inputs from different data centers, from different research groups to try to understand
like how we're altering the systems and how can we do to like do climate adaptation, for example.
So, and this is very pressing because you can see the progression from one year to the last year.
But the good thing is that not, you know, in the last 50 years, NASA and other government
agencies have been monitoring the planet and gathering a lot of information about it. So
we have what NASA calls an earth fleet. All of the satellites that are not looking
upwards to the planets and stuff, they are in a science division that NASA has that it's called
the NASA Earth Sciences Mission Directorate. And all of that information, starting from the 80s,
contains invaluable information about our planet. Like each of those satellites has very
complex sensors and very accurate measurements are made on a daily basis. That information is
sent back to us and it's being distributed to one of these data archive centers. Historically,
there have been 12 and they are divided by kind of like a science domain expertise. And another
thing that it's important to note from that graphic is that the information is booming
because each mission contains probably more complicated sensor or more sensors
and or more coverage. So it's an exponential growth in information
that scientists have to like now have to deal with.
The cool thing about having all this information is that now scientists can actually answer
research questions at a planetary scale. So before having satellites and remote sensing,
we had surveys, we had like, you know, these big research campaigns that took a lot of effort.
But with a satellite, you basically or scientists have basically the information at their fingertips
or should have the information at their fingertips to say what is, for example,
the biomass of the Braille forest or what is the extent of the sea ice. And the answer to those
questions has big implications for planet and the understanding of the systems that I was explaining.
Now, to get to these nice graphics and data processing for answering those questions,
they have to deal with a lot of the data that's coming from the satellites, of course. But once
that they have that information, they can they can definitely answer those questions. And one of the
cool things that they can do, for example, with that data is to create machine learning models,
for example. This is a very recent publication that from an article at The New York Times that
talk about the latest Google DeepMind model called GraphCast that uses a lot of these
observations and machine learning to predict the trajectory of a hurricane, for example. And as you
can see, the model did better than the actual numerical models that are in blue at the bottom.
It takes a lot of data and computation to come up with this stuff. But the good thing about it,
the promising thing about it is that it can help us, you know, adapt to what's coming or
what we're living in our day. Now, so we have data, we have AI, we have scientists. Now let's get to
work, right? Like we're going to solve this thing and if we put all together to work and we'll have
smart policies, then we shouldn't worry about climate change. But first we need to start by
finding the data and working with the data. And I really like this tweet from a NASA scientist
that I put in all the presentations that I give. And it's basically a pain that if you're a research
scientist that works with some of this, you know, scientific data or any data, you probably have come
across like the same issue. You're trying to find something useful for your research and you Google
it up and then you end up in a government page that has some links and, you know, that link takes
you to another link and it takes you to another link until you finally find the information that you're
looking for. But that gets complicated. So, of course, NASA being NASA is like, well, there must be
an easier way, right? Or a more efficient way of distributing this information. Of course, let's
create an API. So now you have, you know, say that you're looking for some data about the ocean or
some data about aerosol in the atmosphere. NASA developed APIs to get to like that information.
But because historically this data has been distributed in these different data centers
that are domain-specific, well, something happened with the evolution of these APIs.
And that is that every data center in NASA has their own set of APIs and their own set of, you know,
ways of getting to the data. Now, this is changing because NASA is migrating all this information to
the cloud. All this information is like halfway into AWS. So, but the APIs are kind of like an
artifact of the history of how this data was distributed. Now, once you take those APIs and
put them in the cloud, that's when the real complexities start to emerge for a research
scientist. So you are a biologist, but guess what? Now you have to learn AWS and take the course of
cloud architecture. Because as you can see, like this diagram illustrates a little bit of like the
journey of like, oh, so NASA has the data in the cloud. So I know that you can access it in an S3
bucket. S3 buckets are the, you know, the Amazon way of storing objects in the cloud. So you try
to access it and then you find all of those obstacles that are related to how the APIs work
together. And if you're a software engineer, well, you kind of get that if you're not a software
engineer, like most of the research scientists, then you have a bad day. And then it leads to this.
It leads like, you start like writing code just to deal with AWS, just to deal with how to get the
data. And by the end of the day, you are frustrated because it's like, show me the data. I just want
the data. I don't want to learn, you know, software engineering or AWS. And we can all agree that
it shouldn't be that way. Science, it's, you know, a collaborative effort. And my vision
and the people that I work with has the same vision of it's not, it shouldn't be exclusive,
right? Like it should be inclusive. And everybody that can participate in science should participate
in science. And software, it shouldn't be a limitation. So no one should be left behind.
Scientists, more importantly.
So in the year 2000, late 2021, NASA partnered with OpenEscapes. And if you were here last year,
you know what OpenEscapes is. But if not, it's a really cool project about like teaching open
science practices to different cohorts of scientists across, you know, different organizations. So
NASA partnered with OpenEscapes to kind of learn together, okay, we know that this is painful. We
know that data in the cloud is going to be problematic for the scientists. So how can we
like all try to solve this problem together? And well, then we went back to the what is
problematic for the scientists. And we kind of divided the problem into like, you know,
the operations that you have to do in order to get to the data. Regardless of where the data was,
you needed some authentication. You need to search for the data. And once you find the data,
you need to access it. So once you divide that, two years ago, it occurred to me that, oh,
this should be in a package. Because like those operations are very concrete. And that's how
the package that I'm talking about came to be. So AirDex is really simple. It doesn't have a lot of,
there is a lot of things probably going on under the hood. But for the scientists, it's basically
three lines of code. So they have to have a credential with NASA. They have to search for
something. And you can use the DOI for the data set, if it's one available, your bounding box,
your temporal domain. And you can use more of those things. But as you can see,
even if you understand Python, you see that it's very concrete and very simple.
Now, this is a real science example for AirDex. And this is like searching for some data,
getting some, what in the NASA lingo is called granules or files from the satellite,
and plotting that data using X-ray, the library that we heard in a previous talk. So
the whole code for doing this, that's plotting sea level rise, the line on the right is from
the satellite, and the other is from a different data set that was in voice in the ocean.
Well, you know, you're looking at it, and it's not as long as it used to be because now
AirDex allows scientists to focus on their science and not on the other
problems of accessing the data. So you can basically come up with this infographic
by yourself that NASA has in their sea level rise group webpage with very few lines of code.
And now the next thing that we're trying to do with our access is like, well, we know that this
is a toy example, kind of. Scientists, what they really want to answer those planetary questions
that I was. So they don't deal with one file or two files. They deal with archives that contain
a thousand or a million files, and you need to scale this thing. So once you put that
same philosophy on doing that, the code doesn't change, but the semantics doesn't change.
What the science wants is that answer. And the next thing for Redax is the library is how to
deal with distributed authentication, with optimized reads to the files and IO and caching
and all of the cool stuff, but with keeping the simplicity of the API.
So in a way, I think the project has become this technical and social bridge between the APIs that
NASA produced over the years it is producing and the libraries that scientists are using
for getting to that data. So you see, you can use Redax to get some data and put it in Pandas
or open it in X-ray. And we have this interoperability because, you know, we have this
connection of ecosystems. And fortunately, that has resonated with the scientists because it's like,
wow, this is like not as complicated as it used to be. And from only me and a few others, the library
grew up to like, now a lot of people are using it because it makes sense. It's simpler. And
the other side of this is that I thought at the beginning that this shouldn't be language specific.
So Carl Bodiger, a professor at the University of Berkeley, had like, oh, we should take some
part of Redax and do like the login mechanism in R if you are like an R scientist. And it started
this project called RdataLogin, which has some of the basic code that you need to know to do
RdataLogin, which has some of the basic core things that Redax does.
And the idea that I have is that it becomes an SDK because that's what at the end scientists
will need. Like, they are the same operations and it shouldn't be limited to one language.
Whatever language a scientist uses, that's where Redax should be living. And we
have some talks with people that work with Julia. So that will be the next one.
And I think this is the message, right? Like, if we reduce accidental complexity and make things
simpler for the scientists, help them actually solve the problems, because we're not solving
the problems. That is the complicated part. I think the technical side on the left on this graph
is the simple part. The really complicated thing is like, once you have that, you know,
the biggest study about what's happening in the nervous system, like what's happening to the
Amazon, what's happening in the rivers, then how to transform that into policy. That is the
complicated stuff. So the technical side, I invite you all to help your local scientists
in solving that part. And this is some of the people that have helped the library over these
last two years. And you might have seen some familiar faces. But with that, I thank you and
I accept your question.
All right. So our first question is to Jim Manday.
And Jim, are those who agreed that you weren't interested in biology obliging
me to participate in this project to make the MoYou in your space aholic?
Sorry.